Just a tiny, brief history here.
SQLite was created for
the Navy by a contractor
named Dr D Richard Hipp in about 2000,
he was writing something for a destroyer.
I don't remember exactly what it was,
it was some piece of the destroyer.
He evaluated a bunch of technologies,
but he ended up just kind of designing
his own to be very small,
very limited, and very single purpose,
to like, I need a library to be
able to write SQLite queries to.
And we'll get more into that here in
just a second, that is open source.
I mean, this was today, so
you can see very active development.
These are all things that have been
checked in today, which is pretty cool.
It's also on GitHub,
it's just mirrored there.
But you can see here 50 minutes ago, they
changed the README, which is pretty cool.
>> Brian Holt: And
its open source license is public domain,
which is not something
you see very frequently.
But it's been around long enough as
open source that they released it under
the public domain,
which is interesting as well.
The one thing about SQLite is
that it is not open contribution.
Whereas normally you can hop on GitHub and
you find a problem,
you can just submit a fix, they do
not accept any outside contribution.
There's just a core small set
of developers of which Dr.
Hipp is one of them.
He keeps a really tight control over what
is SQLite, what's the meaning for SQLite.
He is what they call a BDFL,
the benevolent dictator for life,
which is what Guido Van Rossum was for
Python, and there's been a couple of them.
But anyway, obviously he's been
a very good steward of SQLite.
>> Brian Holt: Just an interesting fact
that I found is he didn't wanna use Git,
so he invented his own source control
management software called Fossil.
It was made for the single
purpose of supporting SQLite, and
basically the two biggest projects on
Fossil are SQLite and Fossil itself.
So in other words,
not many other people use it.
I left a link there if you
wanna look at how they differ.
I've never even tried to use it myself.
But as you might guess, Dr.
Hipp is the maintainer of Fossil as well.
So anyway, in practice,
you don't really need to care.
None of this is actually
super important to you,
I just found all the history
here fairly interesting.
In theory,
SQLite is the most deployed library ever,
most deployed software ever, in theory.
They can't really prove it,
because how do you prove that?
But they've estimated that there's
a trillion SQLite databases that exist out
there, which is pretty wild
to say out loud, right?
So I left another link in there,
they have a more thorough explanation
of how they come to that number.
But here's just some basic
things that are using SQLite.
Every iPhone, every Mac, every Android,
every Windows 10 computer,
all of your browsers, every Skype,
iTunes, Dropbox, TurboTax.
PHP and Python use it on the internals
of the library or of the runtimes.
TV sets, set-top boxes,
your car very likely runs SQLite.
Your fridge might run it if it has
software on it, like gets on everything.
That's how they get to a trillion, right?
Because your iPhone probably has,
I'm gonna guess,
100 instances of SQLite running
across all of the apps,
because it's very common to
put it inside of apps as well.
So wild of how frequently
this library is deployed.
In other words,
it's probably the most battle-tested
piece of software of all time.
It runs everywhere, it requires so little
resources that it will run on any device.
It runs on low power,
it runs on high power,
it will just run on any architecture.
It's one of the first piece of software
that they tend to convert when they're
creating new operating systems.
Cool, so what is SQLite not?
It's not a server, and that's probably
gonna be one of the most confusing things.
If you've never approached SQLite before
and you've used a database before,
it's not a server.
So when you wanna use Mongo or
Postgres or MySQL or
something like that,
you have to start a server, right?
You'd say MongoD or Postgres or
something like that, and
then you just see
the output of the server.
And then all of a sudden,
you can start connecting to your server.
That is not what SQLite is,
and it's not what it does.
Instead, you can think of SQLite
as basically a way to read and
write to a file.
So it's not running a server,
it's a library that just allows you
to basically spit out input into
a file and then read output back out.
It's a way more closer to accurate way of
thinking what SQLite is gonna do for you.
So, in other words,
SQLite has no network access.
It doesn't have users, it doesn't
have passwords and management, and
all that kind of things.
It doesn't handle any of
those kind of things.
It's designed to work on the same computer
as the app that is using it, right?
>> Student: You don't have an SQLite
container that you then connect into,
as opposed to like Postgres,
where you do, right?
You have a node app that
then starts reading and
writing to a file via the SQLite library.
We'll do this over and over and
over again, but for me,
I found this very confusing when I
was getting started with SQLite.
>> Brian Holt: It's a single node,
so there's no replication,
there's no primaries and secondaries.
It's zero configuration to start it,
you just run it and it just works.
Yeah.
>> Student: If the data is locally,
how would you encrypt it?
>> Brian Holt: It's a good question,
not something that we would
necessarily cover in this course.
But there is an extension to SQLite
that you can encrypt your files as well.
And then you can give it a key and
it'll read and write based on the key.
>> Brian Holt: Not something that I've
actually done myself, so I'm not gonna say
a lot more than that, but
I know there's a crypto extension for it.
In other words, it's not built into
escalate itself, I'm pretty sure.
>> Brian Holt: Cool, so single node,
there's no replication,
there's no consensus,
it's designed to be a node of one.
You can do backups, and we will actually
do backups at the end of this, but
there's no concept of primary leader or
secondary follower or anything like that.
So it's on one hand like
a paradigm shift for
I imagine how some of you think about
databases, or maybe for some of you,
this is all you know and you don't know
how to do the other style of database.
But yeah, it's a library,
it's not a server.
SQLite is unbelievably fast,
it's made to work in
performance-sensitive environments.
They take great care to make sure that it
reads and writes at incredible speeds.
That is one of the biggest benefits
of SQLite, is it's just very, very,
very fast.
Particularly cuz you're not
hitting the network at all, right?
It's basically as fast as your
disk can read and write to it.
And sometimes they use tricks to make it
even faster than it probably could be,
right, which is pretty cool.
>> Brian Holt: So
can I use SQLite in production?
And the answer to that is yes and
no, right?
Or the most common cop out answer that
I just love to give, which it depends.
So it depends on what you're storing, it
depends on your sensitivity to downtime,
it depends on how much you kind of wanna
roll your own kind of encryption or
user access.
Or a bunch of things like that
where you can use in production and
now they're actually
tools that will help you.
We'll look at some of them.
But if you wanna just use vanilla SQLite
and you're trying to run Facebook
entirely off of one SQLite node with
no help, no, you can't do that.
It's just not gonna work the way
that you want it to, it's not.
You're gonna be so bound to your
app servers staying up, right?
That is just not gonna work very well,
so it depends on what you need.
The other thing that we'll find out
is that it's intentionally limited.
They intentionally keep
a very small subsection
of features from all of
SQL to keep it small,
fast, performant, simple.
So there's a bunch of features that
Postgres and MySQL and Snowflake and
Mongo and all your other favorite database
pieces of software implement that.
SQLite intentionally does not, and
you have to be willing to
make those trade-offs.
I do have another course on here,
the complete intro to databases,
where we go over several of those
databases and how they work.
I don't talk about SQLite in particular,
but
I do talk about Postgres versus
Mongo versus Neo4j versus Redis.
I think that's it,
I think that's all I cover in there,
which is cool because that kind of
examines all of the various different
perspectives on how to write data apps.
Okay, so
there are several paid services that do
SQLite in the cloud and
they're all lovely.
I've used all of them personally
as part of my day job.
I'll leave it to you to go
figure out which one you like,
but they all kind of take it
from Spin on those ideas.
>> Brian Holt: Cool, any questions so far?
Yeah.
>> Student: So
is it feasible to start with SQLite and
then migrate to Postgres later, or is it
an interoperability concern syntax wise?
>> Brian Holt: It's
a really good question.
I would say most people use it that way,
so extremely viable.
For example, if you go to
the Rails tutorials and try and
teach yourself Rails
just from their website.
They have you start on SQLite,
get really far into it, and
then migrate over to Postgres, I think.
It might be MySQL, it's one of the two.
Super viable, lots of people do it,
there's tons of tools
that help you do that.
There's one that's called pgloader where
you can take a SQLite database and say,
go ahead and dump this directly
into Postgres, and it just works,
which is pretty cool.
It'll work with CSVs and
a bunch of stuff like that.
I'll tell you that for a decade,
that's the way I've used SQLite.
I will say now that these tools that
exist now can scale that out, right?
You can actually just continue
on SQLite as well, and
that's just a choice that you have.